.. index:: source management

.. _Managing_Sources:

****************
Managing Sources
****************

This chapter covers how GPR locates source files: directory scanning,
explicit file lists, exclusions, and naming conventions. Understanding these
mechanisms lets you organise your source tree freely without forcing a
particular directory layout.


How source discovery works
==========================

When a project is loaded, GPRbuild scans every directory listed in
``Source_Dirs`` and collects all files whose extensions match the active
languages. For Ada, the default extensions are ``.ads`` (specs) and ``.adb``
(bodies); for C, ``.c`` and ``.h``; and so on.

Files that do not match any known extension for the declared languages are
silently ignored.


.. index:: Source_Dirs

Source directories
==================

``Source_Dirs`` accepts a list of directory paths, relative to the project
file. Glob patterns are expanded at load time:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Source_Dirs use ("src", "generated/src", "platform/" & Platform);

The ``**`` pattern matches any number of directory levels, enabling a
recursive scan:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Source_Dirs use ("src/**");

This collects sources from ``src/`` and every subdirectory beneath it,
however deeply nested.

To collect sources *only* from the project file's own directory, use a
single dot:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Source_Dirs use (".");

.. index:: abstract project

To declare a project with no sources - one that exists purely to share
attributes with other projects - use the ``abstract`` qualifier:

.. code-block:: gpr

   abstract project Support is
      --  no sources; attributes only
   end Support;

An ``abstract`` project may not declare ``Main``, ``Object_Dir``, or
``Exec_Dir``; those attributes are meaningful only for projects that produce
build artifacts. See :ref:`Project_Extension_UG` for a typical use of abstract
projects.

.. tip::

   Avoid overlapping ``Source_Dirs`` between two projects in the same tree.
   If the same source file is visible to two projects, GPRbuild reports a
   duplicate-unit error at load time.


.. index:: Source_Files

Explicit source lists
=====================

For finer control, you can enumerate sources explicitly instead of scanning
a directory.

``Source_Files`` lists individual file names (not paths) directly in the
project file:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Source_Files use ("utils.ads", "utils.adb", "config.ads");

Only the named files are included, even if other source files exist in
``Source_Dirs``.

For larger lists, ``Source_List_File`` points to a text file containing one
file name per line:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Source_List_File use "sources.txt";

This is useful when the list is generated by a build script or version
control system.


.. index:: Excluded_Source_Files

Excluding sources
=================

``Excluded_Source_Files`` removes specific files from an otherwise
directory-scanned project:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Excluded_Source_Files use ("old_impl.adb", "stub.ads");

The complement of ``Source_List_File``, ``Excluded_Source_List_File`` points
to a text file listing the files to exclude:

.. code-block:: gpr

   for Excluded_Source_List_File use "excluded.txt";

Exclusions apply after the directory scan, so you can keep sources in the
same directory without including all of them in the build.


.. index:: naming convention, Languages

Ada naming conventions
======================

The default naming convention for Ada follows the GNAT standard:

- Specs use the ``.ads`` extension, bodies use ``.adb``.
- Child unit names use ``-`` as the separator: the body of
  ``My_Lib.Utils`` lives in ``my_lib-utils.adb``.
- Unit names map to file names in lower case.

Ada source files and unit names are tightly coupled: when a file with the
right suffix (``.ads`` or ``.adb``) is found in a source directory, GPR
derives the corresponding unit name by reversing the naming convention
(stripping the suffix, replacing the dot-replacement character back to
``.``, and so on). If the result is not a valid Ada identifier, the file is
silently ignored.

For example, ``my_source__unix.adb`` maps to ``my_source__unix`` - a name
containing a double underscore, which is not valid in Ada. GPR will not
recognise this file as an Ada source during directory scanning.

.. tip::

   To include a file whose name would otherwise be rejected, add an explicit
   per-unit mapping in the ``Naming`` package (see `Per-unit overrides`_
   below).

If your project uses a different convention, the ``Naming`` package lets
you override it.

Changing the dot replacement character
---------------------------------------

To use ``__`` instead of ``-`` as the child-unit separator:

.. code-block:: gpr

   package Naming is
      for Dot_Replacement use "__";
   end Naming;

With this setting, the body of ``My_Lib.Utils`` is expected in
``my_lib__utils.adb``.

Changing the default suffixes
------------------------------

.. code-block:: gpr

   package Naming is
      for Spec_Suffix ("Ada") use ".1.ada";
      for Body_Suffix ("Ada") use ".2.ada";
   end Naming;

Per-unit overrides
------------------

Individual units can be mapped to arbitrary file names:

.. code-block:: gpr

   package Naming is
      for Spec ("My_Lib.Utils") use "ml_utils_s.ada";
      for Body ("My_Lib.Utils") use "ml_utils_b.ada";
   end Naming;

Per-unit mappings take precedence over suffix rules. This is the mechanism
GPRname uses when it generates a project file for a source tree with
non-standard naming (see :ref:`Working_With_Tools`).


Multiple suffixes per language
==============================

``Body_Suffix`` and ``Spec_Suffix`` accept a single value per language. A
project that contains source files with different suffixes for the same
language - for example ``.cc`` and ``.cpp`` both for C++ - cannot be
described by a single suffix declaration.

Two options are available:

* **Rename all files to a common suffix.** This requires no project structure
  changes and is the simplest solution when the source tree is under your
  control.

* **Split into two projects with** ``limited with``. Create a companion
  project that covers the extra suffix, sharing the same ``Source_Dirs`` and
  ``Object_Dir`` as the primary project. The companion imports the primary
  with a regular ``with``; the primary references the companion back with
  ``limited with`` to break what would otherwise be a circular dependency.
  The companion also sets ``Spec_Suffix`` to a value that matches no file, so
  it does not claim spec files already owned by the primary. The compiler
  settings are shared by renaming the package:

  .. code-block:: gpr

     --  prj.gpr  (handles .cpp files)
     limited with "prj_cc_support";

     project Prj is
        for Languages   use ("C++");
        for Source_Dirs use ("src");
        for Object_Dir  use "obj";

        package Naming is
           for Body_Suffix ("C++") use ".cpp";
           for Spec_Suffix ("C++") use ".h";
        end Naming;

        package Compiler is
           for Switches ("C++") use ("-O2");
        end Compiler;
     end Prj;

  .. code-block:: gpr

     --  prj_cc_support.gpr  (handles .cc files)
     with "prj";

     project Prj_Cc_Support is
        for Languages   use ("C++");
        for Source_Dirs use Prj'Source_Dirs;
        for Object_Dir  use Prj'Object_Dir;

        package Naming is
           for Body_Suffix ("C++") use ".cc";
           for Spec_Suffix ("C++") use ".no_match";  --  no .no_match files exist
        end Naming;

        package Compiler renames Prj.Compiler;
     end Prj_Cc_Support;

  Build with ``gprbuild -P prj.gpr``: GPRbuild loads both projects and
  compiles ``.cpp`` files via ``Prj`` and ``.cc`` files via
  ``Prj_Cc_Support``, depositing all objects in the shared ``obj/``
  directory.
